
Lesson D-14

The Moon and Its Phases, 
and Tides


Overview: 

While people can hardly help but be attracted to the beauty of the moon in the night sky, many harbor misconceptions regarding why it is that we see the various phases as we do. In this lesson students will make systematic observations of the moon. From their data, they will derive that the moon is orbiting the Earth, and its different phases are given by the portion of its sunlit surface that we are able to see. Then, from data of tidal schedules and times of moonrise, students will find the correlation and gain the understanding of how tides are caused by the moon (moderated to some degree by the sun). This lesson provides a stepping-stone for moving into further aspects astronomy and/or the study of the ecology and importance of intertidal zones.
  
Time Required: 

Part 1. Creating the Background (assigning “homework” and discussion as deemed necessary; may be omitted if students have already mastered the content) 
Part 2. Plotting the Movement of the Moon Around the Earth (“homework” with support from parents or others, time as necessary to make arrangements; follow-up discussion and analysis of results, 1-2 hours)
Part 3. Eclipses of the Moon and Sun (modeling and interpretation, 40-50 minutes)
Part 4. Tides (correlating data, 40-50 minutes; analysis and interpretation 40-50 minutes)

Outcomes: Through this exercise, students will be able to:

1. Draw a graphical picture of how the moon’s phases change in a regular cycle.

2. From firsthand observations made at the same time on successive evenings, make a “poster” showing how the moon progresses across the sky changing phases as it goes. Explain why such observations must be made at the same time each evening.

3. Make diagrams, based on firsthand observations, showing the relative position of the sun in relation to the Earth and moon, as the moon moves through its phases. 

4. Explain how the observations (above) lead to the conclusion that the moon is orbiting the Earth and its phases are given by the portion of its lighted face that are visible from Earth.

5. Explain why, on clear nights, we may see a dim outline of the otherwise dark portion of the moon.

6. Explain what is meant by and diagram the relative positions of sun, Earth and moon during an eclipse of the sun.  …during an eclipse of the moon.

7. Explain and diagram what is occurring that gives us the view of an eclipse of the sun.

8. Explain and diagram what is occurring that gives us the view of an eclipse of the moon.

9. Explain why eclipses of the sun and/or moon are not seen on every lunar cycle.

10. Show/describe data that lead to the conclusion that tides are caused by the moon.
		
11. Explain why the difference between high and low tide varies in a regular cycle with the phase of the moon. 

Required Background: 

A general familiarity with the fact that planets, moons, human-made satellites, and other objects within the solar system are held in orbits, one around another, by mutual gravitational attraction. This understanding should be well in place from Lessons D-6, D-7, and others. 
Math: Facility with calculating the amount of time between two times of day.
Maturity to make systematic, daily observations over a period of two weeks is assumed.

Materials: 

Part 1. Creating the Background
Graph paper

Part 2. Plotting the Movement of the Moon Around the Earth
The key factor in this exercise will be scheduling it for a period of time that extends from a new moon to a full moon at a time of year that usually provides mostly clear weather. A further requirement will be finding an easily accessible location(s) that provides a more or less unobstructed view from the east to west horizons, and assuring that kids get to it at the same time each evening to make observations. It may be a different location for each student. Suitably mature students may be able to do this on their own, but obtaining support from parents and/or other persons will probably be necessary. 

Materials that will be required at the location(s) of observation
A table at the point of observation (a small folding table taken to and from the point of observation may be used.)
A sheet of white poster paper
Marker
“Sticky notes”

Part 3. Eclipses of the Moon and Sun
No particular materials are need in this part although rubber balls to model the Earth and moon may be helpful. Also, you may show videos of the solar and lunar eclipses (Google: solar eclipse video/ also: lunar eclipse video).

Part 4. Tides
If students have not had firsthand experience seeing tides: pictures/videos showing the difference between high and low tides (Google: shoreline high tide low tide)
Schedule of tides for a desired area and schedule of moonrise and moonset at the same location. The two are often given together. (Google: tidal schedule moonrise)
Two tennis or similar balls tied into opposite ends of a long sock  
Pictures of intertidal zones (Google: intertidal zones)

Teachable Moments: 

At any time there is a clear view of the moon (any phase), pause to admire it with your kids. Express your being attracted to it: Did you see the moon last night? As kids also come to admire the moon, suggest observing it in a more systematic way. 

Methods and Procedures: 

Part 1. Creating the Background

Kids have undoubtedly observed the moon, seen it at various phases, and probably learned that the moon orbits the Earth. However, they have probably not given much thought or attention to how the moon’s phases result from the relative positions of the sun, moon, and Earth.

I have not put this exercise earlier in the curriculum because it requires observations during out-of-school hours, and the observations themselves require a level of maturity more advanced than most 8-10 year-olds posses.

The lesson should be preceded by enough casual observations of the moon so that students are familiar with the fact that there is a cycle of phases from new, to quarter, to full moon, and back to new on a roughly monthly cycle. Hopefully, such observations were incorporated into the ongoing process of Lesson D-6, “Seasonal Changes and the Earth’s Orbit.” 

If students have not had the background of observing phases of the moon, assign the homework of keeping an eye out for the moon on a daily basis and making a record of date, time, and the shape of the moon as they see it on each date, i.e., its lighted portion from crescent to full. Small diagrams will serve as descriptions of shape. (The specific names for the shapes between new moon and full moon are immaterial at this point.) On some days/nights the moon will not be visible; nevertheless keep an eye out and record observations so far as possible. Finally, make a graph of the results with dates along the bottom and the phase indicated on the vertical axis. Put the new moon at the low end and the full moon at the top of the vertical axis, with other shapes in between. This may be done as a team effort by a group of students. 

Have students carry on this activity as they can over a period of two months or more. (It only requires an awareness to look up at the sky occasionally, see if the moon is visible, and two or three minutes to make the recording if it is.) 

From this activity, students should derive a picture (mental and graphical) that the moon proceeds through a regular cycle of phases from new to full and back to new. (There will be a time after the full moon that it may be largely out of sight, at least during normal waking hours, until it shows itself as a new moon again to start the cycle over.) The entire cycle from full moon to full moon takes 29 days. (Actually it is closer to 29.5 days but the half day will probably not be discernable unless students extend this exercise over several months.) With this general picture in mind, invite students to embark on a more critical investigation. 

Part 2. Plotting the Movement of the Moon Around the Earth

The gist of this part of the exercise is to observe and record the position and phase of the moon as it progresses from new moon to full moon. Students will further analyze the position and phase of the moon relative to the sun and determine that the moon is orbiting the Earth and its phases result from our seeing different portions of moon’s surface, which are illuminated by the sun.   

The prerequisite for this activity is a location where you have a clear or nearly clear view of the sky from the east horizon to the west horizon. (You may go to different locations to obtain unobstructed views of the eastern and western horizons, but it will make analysis and interpretation a little more difficult.)

The second prerequisite is the ability (and resolution) to be at the same site every evening at exactly the same time to observe and record the position and phase of the moon (weather permitting). The time for observation should be at the approximate time of sunset or shortly thereafter. Depending on the time of year this may be any time from about 5:30 to 8:30 p.m., but observation must be at the same time each evening. The point of this—have students participate in this reasoning—is that to observe the movement of the moon, we need to have the Earth in a constant position. The Earth makes one rotation in 24 hours. Therefore, when we observe the moon at, for example, 6:00 p.m. each evening, the Earth will be in the same position in its rotation. Thus, any difference in the moon’s position will be due to the moon’s movement, not a difference in the degree of the Earth’s rotation. 
Note: The Earth actually makes one 360 degree rotation in 23 hours and 56 minutes (rounding off ). The discrepancy between this and our 24-hour day results from the fact that the Earth is progressing in its orbit around the sun. Model and observe with a globe that the orbital progression results in the Earth turning slightly more than 360˚ (approximately 361˚) from solar noon of one day to solar noon of the next. Taking this into account obviously makes timing more complex and potentially confusing, but the difference is not so great as to change the outcome of observations. Therefore, I recommend overlooking it in this exercise.  

From a calendar (or the Internet) pick a two-week period extending from the date of a new moon to the date of a full moon. This two-week period can be at any time of year, although it makes sense, if possible, to select a normally dry and warm time of year to minimize interference of cloudy or excessively cold weather. If weather does cause a wipe-out of more than four to five days in a row the exercise can be rescheduled to start at another new moon.  

For making and recording observations, curve a piece of poster paper into a semicircle and tape it edgewise to a tabletop so that the bulge of the curve is toward the south, its right hand edge is oriented to the west, and its left hand edge is to the east. 

Note: These and following directions assume that you are in the Northern Hemisphere, facing south, and the moon is passing somewhat to the south of directly overhead. If you are the Southern Hemisphere, facing north to view the moon, east and west will be reversed.

Looking into the curve, students may wish to draw in outlines of buildings, trees, etc., along the bottom edge of the poster as they are actually seen from their location. That is, buildings/trees to the west will start at the right-hand edge and so on around the curve to the east. In any case, the right-hand edge should be labeled west and the left-hand edge labeled east. 

Each observation is made by simply looking at the moon, noting its position and shape (phase), and recording them on the poster. This is most easily done by making a diagram of the moon’s shape on a sticky note, and then putting the note on the poster. The position on the paper should be aligned (as closely as can be approximated) with a sighting from the table surface at the center of poster’s curve to the moon. Later the diagram can be put on the poster in permanent fashion. (Be sure that students’ diagrams give an accurate representation of the way the moon actually appears. A common mistake is to reverse the curvature of the crescent and/or ongoing phases of the moon. This mistake would make the later logical analysis impossible.)

  Additionally, have students observe and record the position of the sun relative to the moon and Earth. For example, at the starting date (new moon), students will see the moon as a thin crescent low in the western sky close to the same direction as the setting sun. They should note that the outside curve of the crescent faces the sun. On successive evenings at the same time, they will observe the sun in the same relative position (sunset) but the moon will be progressively higher in the sky, and its shape will be advancing toward the half moon (first quarter). 

Note: Seeing a half moon and also calling it the “first quarter” appears to be an obvious contradiction. The apparent contradiction occurs because the “half moon” refers to the fact we see half of the moon’s disc. The “quarter” refers to the fact that this occurs at the end of the first quarter of the moon’s complete cycle. The same follows for the waning “half moon” being called the third quarter.   

Continuing observations will reveal the moon, at the time of sunset, at a location progressively toward the east. About two weeks after the new moon, students will observe the full moon rising in the east as the sun is setting in the west. (Diagrams/photographs of this sequence may be found on the Internet (Google: phases of the moon). However, firsthand observation/discovery are always the best learning experience.)

Of course, observations may continue beyond the full moon. If this is done, students will find the moon rising about an hour (48 minutes on the average to be more exact) later each evening, and the lighted portion will be diminishing in size. A week after the full moon, students may see half the moon’s lighted face (third quarter) rising in the east at about midnight, if they are awake to see it. Alternatively, they may switch to early morning observations. As the sun is rising in the east, they will see the moon setting in the west. Then, on successive days, they will see the moon moving toward the position of the sun and the lighted portion reducing still more. With early rising and careful observation, just before the new moon, they may spot the thin crescent moon in the eastern sky just before sunrise. (After sunrise, the sun’s light, being so much brighter than the moon,  obscures the sight of the moon.) A day or so later, they will be back to the start of another cycle. Just before and just after the new moon, nights are essentially moonless because the moon is aligned toward the sun. It is “up” during daytime hours so that we can’t see it. 

If this spotting of the crescent moon rising just ahead of the sun is made, be sure to have students note that the direction of the moon’s crescent is reversed left to right. The lighted outer curve of the crescent faces the sun, but since it is rising ahead of the sun rather then following behind the sun, it is reversed.

Add that the moon, as it goes from new to full, the lighted portion of its face increasing, it is said to be waxing. As it goes from full toward new, its lighted face diminishing, it said to be waning. A moon seen in the afternoon (before 6:00 p.m.) will always be waxing. A moon seen rising in the evening (after 7:00 p.m.) will always be waning. When the moon is seen rising between 6:00 and 7:00 p.m., it will be full or virtually full. Ask students to view their data and determine why this is so.

Analysis of Results

Proceed to have students analyze and interpret their results. (This can be done with just the sightings from new moon to full moon, but additional observations may be added.) First, address the movement of the moon. Guide students in reasoning: 

• By observing the moon at the same time each evening, the Earth should be in the same position regarding its rotation. Thus, we are observing the moon from a fixed location.

Note: Again, we are ignoring the movement of the Earth in its orbit around the sun for the sake of avoiding undue complexity. If any students do bring this up, congratulate them for their insight, but say over the duration of observations (about two weeks) the shift in the Earth’s location has relatively little effect.

• From the vantage point of a fixed location, we see that the moon is progressing across the sky. If you wish to take students into measurement of angles and math, they may determine that the moon shifts its position by about twelve degrees per day. 

• The only way to explain this logically is that the moon is progressing in an orbit around the Earth. Moonless nights occur when the moon is toward the sun. 

Some students are likely to remain confused. Remind them again that the major (apparent) movement of the sun, moon, and stars across the sky each day/night results from the Earth’s rotation, our changing vantage point. But, when we make our observations at the same time on successive evenings we keep our vantage point fixed. Thus, changes in the moon’s position are due to the movement of the moon itself. 

Some students are likely to ask: Why don’t we see this movement? Suggest that students figure this out for themselves. Since the moon travels just 12 degrees around its orbit in a day, that means it travels just 0.5 degrees per hour, too slow to be noticeable unless one observes very carefully over an extended period of time. One needs to note the position of the moon against the background of stars. It helps if there happens to be a bright one close to the moon. Over a period of two hours or so, one will see the gradual movement of the moon relative to the star(s) in the background. Students may pursue this observation if they wish. 

Another question to ask and have students reflect on is: Which direction is the moon orbiting, east to west or west to east? By looking at their posters, they will see that the moon moves from west to east. Have them note that this is the same direction that the Earth is rotating. In other words, if the Earth-moon system were viewed from way above the North Pole, the Earth’s rotation and the moon’s orbit would both be seen as going in a counterclockwise direction. What else is going in a counterclockwise direction? Student should recall that this is also the direction of the Earth’s travel in its orbit around the sun. Add that, as we go on to study further aspects of the solar system, we will discover that  all planets of the solar system, their moons, and other bodies rotate and travel in this same counterclockwise direction. (There is one puzzling exception; one of the moons of Saturn orbits clockwise.)

The Moon’s Changing Phases

Coming to the next topic, ask students, “How should we explain the changing phases of the moon?” There are two erroneous ideas that are commonly suggested. Even if students don’t hold either of these false notions, it is well to bring them up and let students discuss how their observations make them untenable. 

The first erroneous idea involves the moon producing its own light. Students should reason that if this were the case, the moon should have a uniform “full-moon glow” each night. The regularly changing phases would be unexplainable on this basis. 

The second erroneous idea is that the moon is reflecting light from the sun and the phases are due to Earth’s shadow on the moon. The first part of this notion fits—but the Earth’s shadow part??? Have students reflect on where the moon is in relation to the sun when they see the moon as a thin crescent. They should observe from their data that the crescent moon is seen when the moon is close to the same direction as the sun: following the sun down at sunset, or coming up just ahead of the sun at sunrise. 

Where should the Earth’s shadow be falling at that time? The Earth’s shadow must fall in the direction opposite to the sun. There is no way that it can be falling on the moon during that time. Conversely, we see the full moon in the opposite direction from the sun (the sun setting in the west as the moon is rising in the east). This is when we might expect the shadow of the Earth to fall on the moon, and indeed we do see this on the occasions of eclipses of the moon, but most of the time we see a full moon—no shadow at all. 

The explanation that does fit is that what we see of the moon is sunlight reflected from its surface. The dark portion of moon is there, but we don’t see it because little if any sunlight reaches it to reflect back toward our eyes. 

Note: Occasionally, on very clear nights during the first (or last) quarter of the moon’s cycle, one will see a very dim outline of the moon’s dark portion. This is due to light reflected from the Earth onto the dark portion of the moon and back to our eyes.  

Have students reflect on and discuss how this explanation fits with all their observations. When the moon is in a direction toward the sun (new moon), all we see is the bare rim of its lighted side, which gives us the view of a thin crescent.  The half moon (first quarter) is given by there being a roughly right angle between the sun, Earth and moon. Thus, we see the lighted portion of the moon from the side, which gives us the view of a half moon, i.e., half the face of the moon is lighted. Finally, when the moon is in a direction opposite the sun—the moon rising in the east as the sun is setting in the west—we see the entire face of the sunlit moon, the full moon. Similar analysis may follow for the waning moon, i.e., its phases progressing from full to new as it moves on around the Earth toward the sun.  

Use of models and various diagrams will help students gain this understanding.

Part 3. Eclipses of the Moon and Sun

From observations and discussion, it may appear that there is an exact alignment between the sun, Earth, and moon at every new and full moon. Explain that, actually, such perfect alignment occurs only rarely, because the moon’s orbit around the Earth is tilted with respect to the Earth’s orbit around the sun. In fact, such perfect alignments occur only every three years or so. When they do occur we have what is called an ECLIPSE. An eclipse of the sun occurs when the moon passes exactly between the sun and the Earth. Hence, our view of the sun is temporarily blocked by the moon passing in front of it. An eclipse of the moon occurs when the full moon passes through the Earth’s shadow and temporarily fades from view accordingly.   

If chance should provide you with an opportunity to view a solar eclipse first hand, by all means, take advantage of it. Prepare ahead to go to a suitable location at the designated time and have proper light filters for viewing. For SAFETY, caution everyone not to look at the sun directly (even when it is eclipsed) except through proper light filters. (The coming of an eclipse of the sun is well advertised and proper glasses are generally made available. Also, local astronomy groups often set up telescopes with proper filters for viewing and invite the public to attend.) 

In the absence of, or in addition to, viewing a solar eclipse first hand, have students view a video of the event (Google: solar eclipse video). Use Q and A discussion to draw students to explain why they see what they do over the duration of the eclipse. 

Follow the same procedure for an eclipse of the moon. Prepare ahead to be at a suitable location at the proper time, but no special glasses are necessary. In the absence of, or in addition to first-hand viewing, follow up with Q and A discussion that brings student to explain the causes of what they observe.

Part 4. Tides

Most students will be more or less familiar with the concept of tides, even if they lack firsthand experience with them. Nevertheless, bring them up to speed regarding the concept of tides—the fact that we observe a regular rise and fall in sea level along every ocean shore (for pictures, Google: high and low tides Bay of Fundy). In the Bay of Fundy conditions combine to make a spectacular difference between high and low tide. The tidal rise and fall of water level occurs in all other locations of oceans as well, but it may be only a few inches and, away from shorelines, it requires special instrumentation to observe. Pose the question: What causes the tides? Some students may know that it is the moon, but press further. Exactly how do we know that it is the moon? How does the moon have this effect?

Have students look up and print out tide schedules for any desired location (Google: tide schedules). Have them analyze the schedule to find answers to: How many tidal cycles occur each day? (A tidal cycle is from one high tide to the next high tide.) Is it exact? How many minutes’ shift are there between a morning high tide on one day and the morning high tide on the next day? 

From observations and calculations, students will find that there are two tidal cycles per day (24 hours), but it is not precise. A “morning high tide” on the second day will be about 40 to 50 minutes later than on the day before. 

Note: The time difference will vary from day to day going in a cycle from about 50 minutes to 40 minutes and back. This cyclic variation occurs because the moon does not orbit the Earth at a uniform speed. The moon’s orbit is actually an ellipse, as are orbits of all heavenly bodies. As the moon is moving closer to the Earth on its elliptical path, the pull of gravity between Earth and moon causes the moon to speed up. As the moon is moving away from the Earth on its elliptical path, the pull of gravity causes it to slow down, and so on. 

However, at the middle school level, I am content to overlook this unless students notice and ask about it.  

Continue by asking, “What else have we been observing that has a similar shift in its daily cycle?” If students don’t answer, “the moon,” give the hint, “What about the moon?” Let’s check this out more precisely. 

The same tidal schedule(s) that students found for the above exercise will very likely also provide data regarding the moon. (If not, do another search to find a tidal schedule that provides the times of moonrise and moonset, as well as the tidal data for the given location.) Proceed to have students compute the time difference between moonrise and the nearest high tide. 

Note: The only point here is to have the moon event (rising or setting) relatively close to the tidal event in order to simplify computations of time difference. Therefore either the rising or setting of the moon might be correlated with either tide event (high or low). It is only necessary to compare the times of the two over a number of days. 

Computation of time differences may require some special instruction. Simple subtraction of one time from another doesn’t work because place value between minutes and hours is based on 60 rather than 100. Most straight forward, students may count the minutes from the event to the next even hour, add 60 for each hour, and add the minutes after the hour.   

Students will find that the time difference between their chosen moon and tidal events remains quite constant. Again, there may be a variation plus or minus a few minutes from the average; still the close correlation will be clear. Ask students, “What does this tell us regarding the cause for tides?” They will readily conclude that the moon is responsible.

But how? Pursue Q and A discussion to guide students in reasoning out how the moon causes tides on Earth. The easy part of the answer, which students will suggest and grasp readily, is the moon’s gravitational pull on the Earth. The Earth’s gravitational pull on the moon keeps it in orbit, but at the same time the moon’s gravity is pulling on the Earth. Land masses, being solid, are not noticeably affected, but oceans are pulled up into a “bulge” by the moon’s gravity. The bulge remains oriented toward the moon and the Earth rotates under it. Any point of the Earth rotating under the hump will experience the effect of tides; a rising tide as the point moves under the hump, a falling tide as the point moves out from under the hump. 

But there are two tidal cycles a day (approximately). What does this imply? Guide students to reason that there must be a second bulge of water on the opposite side of the Earth, the side opposite to the moon’s gravitational pull. How do we explain this? 

Conduct the simple demonstration with two tennis or similar balls tied into opposite ends of a sock. The question is: When spun and then tossed into the air, which ball will spin around the other? Hold one ball, spin the other around and toss the arrangement in the air so that students can observe. They will note that whichever way it is done, neither ball rotates around the other. When released the two balls commence rotating around a point midway between the two, a point known as the center of gravity. (It is at the point where the two balls would balance if connected by a rod.) As the balls are swinging around a point between, it follows that each is subjected to centrifugal force.

Guide students in relating this simple demonstration to the Earth-moon system. While we commonly speak of the moon as orbiting the Earth and picture the Earth as stationary with respect to the moon, the Earth and moon are actually rotating around a point in between. Thus, centrifugal force counters the pull of gravity and causes water to swing out into a bulge on the side of the Earth opposite the moon. 

Note: This “swinging out” into a bulge on the side of the Earth opposite the moon is reinforced by the fact that the pull of the moon’s gravity on the far side of the Earth is less than on the near side because of its greater distance. The diameter of the Earth is close to 8,000 miles (13,000 kilometers). Therefore, the far side of the Earth is this distance further from the moon. Since gravitational force decreases with distance, the moon exerts less gravitational pull on the far side of the Earth.  

Thus, there are two bulges of water. The Earth rotating under the two gives the two tides per day (approximately). The position of the humps shifts with the moon’s movement around the Earth (about 12 degrees per day). Thus, the Earth must actually rotate about 372 degrees (360 plus 12 degrees) to complete the cycle of the two-tides. This accounts for high tide occurring 40 to 50 minutes later each day.    

Spring and Neap Tides

Tidal schedules will also provide data for the difference in level between high and low tides for given locations. Choosing any desired location, draw students to observe that this difference varies in a regular pattern from higher than average tides to lower than average tides and back. Draw them to correlate the pattern of tidal variation with the phases of the moon. 

Students will discover that the greatest difference between high and low tides occurs at the times of the full moon and the new moon; the least difference occurs at the times of the first and third quarter. Why? Can the sun be playing a role as well as the moon? 
The explanation is: Yes it can and it does. However the sun’s effect on tides is less than that of the moon—because of its much greater distance from the Earth, its gravitational pull is relatively less. However, we do see the sun’s effect in combination with the moon’s. How so? Conduct Q and A discussion to guide students to reason how the sun’s effect on tides adds to the moon’s effect to produce higher than average tides at the times of full and new moon, and less than average tides at the first and third quarters.

You may wish to add that the largest tides are called spring tides (but have nothing to do with spring season), and the minimal tides are called neap tides. 

Some students will invariably ask, “Why don’t we see tides in lakes?” Guide them in reasoning that it takes a very large body of water to allow enough movement to see the “tidal bulge” come and go. In fact, fine enough measuring devices will detect a tidal movement in lakes, at least in large ones. 

There are many other factors affecting tides: contours of the coast line, winds, ocean currents, contours of the sea bottom, location on the Earth, and so on. Some students may wish to pursue these for their own interests. 

Tides and Living Things  

A study of tides logically leads into a study of the species that inhabit the intertidal zone. Huge numbers of both plant and animal species have adapted to and now depend on the conditions of the intertidal zone, which means being more or less submerged by high tides and exposed to air at low tide. Further, great numbers of species are adapted to living just under the low tide level. Coral reefs are a prime example. At your option, pursue looking into different sorts of intertidal zones, the species that inhabit them, and their importance. Here, I only recommend that they be mentioned to have students recognize another example of how species inhabiting an area are always connected to the physical parameters of the environment, in this case the cyclic rising and falling of tides. 

For pictures and further study of intertidal zones, species that inhabit them, their ecological importance, and so on, Google: intertidal zones/ and: tidal wetlands/. Of course, opportunities to visit and study intertidal zones firsthand should not be passed up.

Questions/Discussion/Activities to Review, Reinforce, Expand, and Assess Learning:

Have students record in their science notebooks:
a) objectives and methods for observing the moon’s cycle 
b) a diagram showing where the moon appears in the sky and its phases on successive evenings as it moves from new to full moon 
c) diagrams showing the positions of the sun, Earth, and moon at the moon’s various phases 
d) explanations of why we see the moon’s phases as we do 
e) an explanation of eclipses of the sun and the moon.
f) an explanation of how the moon causes tides

Have students model and demonstrate how and why we see phases of the moon as we do. This may be done by darkening the room except for a lamp at one end. Use a light colored ball (a green tennis ball will work) to represent the moon and move it around the perimeter of the room. Have students in the center of the room representing a vantage point on Earth, describe how they see just a portion of the lighted side of the ball as it is in different positions and relate this to phases of the moon. Extend this modeling to demonstrate the occurrence of an eclipse of the sun and an eclipse of the moon. 

For any given phase of the moon, have students make a diagram showing the relative positions of the sun, Earth, and moon that accord that phase. 

Show students a diagram of relative positions of the sun, Earth, and moon, and have them identify the phase that they would see and whether the moon would be waxing or waning.

Arrange or take advantage of planetarium shows if feasible.

Facilitate students finding and giving brief reports regarding manned space flights to the moon, scientific findings, etc.

Discuss how the moon differs from other planets and stars. That is, discuss how the moon is the one conspicuous heavenly body that orbits the Earth; planets are orbiting the sun, and stars lie far beyond. 

Facilitate students reporting on any personal experience they have had with tides. Have them discuss their findings correlating moon events with the tides. 

In small groups, pose and discuss questions such as:
Someone says, “There is going to be an eclipse of the sun tomorrow.” You know that it is near the time of a full moon. How do you know the person is misguided or lying? (An eclipse of the sun can only occur at the time of the new moon.) Any number of similar questions will draw students to exercise their understanding of the relative positions of the sun, Earth, and moon at various phases.
On observing a “half moon,” how can you tell if it is waxing (first quarter) or waning (third quarter)? 
Why don’t we see the moon just before or after an eclipse of the sun?
Explain how we know that tides are caused by the moon. Give the reason for the two tides that occur each day (about each 25 hours.)
Discuss the cause for higher than average tides occurring at the times of the full and new moon.
A fisherman says “There is going to be a spring tide this evening.” What is he talking about? How does he know (without having looked at any reports)?
Discuss different sorts of intertidal zones and the predominant flora and fauna of each. 

To Parents and Others Providing Support:

Facilitate children making observations as described in this lesson.
Any time the moon is spotted, draw children to consider what phase it is in and toward what phase it is going. When and where should we look for the moon on the next few nights? About how long will it be before the next full moon/new moon? 
On looking at the moon at any time, draw students to consider the approximate location of the sun at that time and how this relates to the portion of the moon’s lighted surface we see, i.e., its phase.
Facilitate students finding and observing films of eclipses, and further information regarding the moon, on the Internet as they may desire. 
Take advantage of, or create opportunities to observe tides. Observe and discuss how the intertidal zone provides a unique habitat that supports many species. That is, it constitutes an unique ecosystem.

Connections to Other Topics and Follow-up to Higher Levels: 

Lesson D-15, The Solar System and Beyond
Scientific investigations of the moon, its composition, etc.
The position and variations of the moon’s orbit
Different sorts of intertidal zones and predominant flora and fauna of each 
Reasons for differing degrees of tidal movement being observed in different locations

Books for Correlated Reading: 

Legault, Thierry and Serge Brunier. New Atlas of the Moon. Firefly Books, 2006.

Chaikin, Andrew. Mission Control, This is Apollo: The Story of the First Voyages of the Moon. 
Viking, 2009.

Chong, S.M., et al. Photographic Atlas of the Moon. Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Light, Michael. Full Moon. Knopf, 1999. (Please note that while this is not a children’s book, it is a science photography book of photographs from the Apollo missions.)

Miller, Ron. Earth and the Moon. Twenty-First Century Books, 2003.

Mitton, Dr. Jacqueline. Eyewitness: Moon.  Dorling Kindersley, 2009.

Thimmesh, Catherine.  Team Moon:  How 400,000 People Landed Apollo 11 on the Moon.  Houghton Mifflin Books for Children, 2006.

For younger students:
Simon, Seymour.  The Moon.  Simon & Schuster, 2003.

￼ Given that the Earth is much more massive than the moon, the “point in between” is actually several hundred miles under the Earth’s surface. Nevertheless, it is far enough from the Earth’s center so that the effect is the same. 