Lesson A-2

Solids, Liquids, and Gases and
Change With Temperature



Overview:

In this lesson students will apply the practice of organizing things into categories (Lesson A/B-1) by assigning anything they encounter to one of three categories: solid, liquid, or gas. By doing so, they will observe attributes and construct definitions for each and learn that these are known as the fundamental states of matter. They will discern that many things, especially living systems, are complex combinations of solids, liquids, and gases. They will further observe that many forms of matter, most notably water, will reversibly change its state depending on temperature; others don’t. 

Position in the Progress of Learning: Beyond the progression of applying their organizations skills (Lesson A/B-1) to categorizing everything in the natural world as solid, liquid, or gas, students’ findings are the starting point for a progression into all further studies concerning the nature of matter that underlie all of chemistry and many aspects of other sciences as well.  

Time required: 

Part 1. Identification of Solids, Liquids, and Gases (demonstration, game/activity, interpretation; 40-50 minutes) 
Part 2. Changes Between Solid, Liquid, and Gas—Dependence on Temperature (demonstrations with interpretive discussion; 20-30 minutes)
Part 3. States of Matter and Their Common Attributes (instruction and thought exercises; 30-40 minutes)

Practices: Students who demonstrate understanding can:

1. Classify any given item or material as solid, liquid, gas, or some combination. 

2. Construct definitions for solids, liquids, and gases based on their observations.  

3. Describe and give examples illustrating how many materials change between solid, liquid and gas states. Point out how change in temperature is the cause of such changes. Cite solids that don’t melt when temperature rises.

4. Give the word that includes all solids, liquids, and gases and use it properly in discussion.

Construct a definition that includes all states of matter and use it in addressing the question: Does matter include everything we interact with in everyday life? Give examples of things that are not included in matter and discuss why not.

6. Name things that are experienced in everyday life but which don’t fit the definition of matter, i.e., they don’t have weight and don’t occupy space. 

Required Background: 

Lesson A/B-1, Organizing Things Into Categories

Materials: 

Part 1. Identification of Solids, Liquids, and Gases
Water and various other liquids in clear containers from around the kitchen and bathroom (cooking oil, liquid detergent, syrup, shampoo, etc.)
Various solid items from around the house (toys, pencils, dishes, coins, etc.)
Three medium-sized cardboard boxes respectively labeled: SOLIDS, LIQUIDS, and GASES. Alternatively, areas on the floor can be marked and labeled.  
Part 2. Changes Between Solid, Liquid, and Gas—Dependence on Temperature
Water in a container
Ice cubes in a bowl
Part 3. States of Matter and Their Common Attributes
No additional materials needed 

Teachable Moments:

Introduce this exercise as a new game that kids may be invited to play at any convenient time. 

Methods and Procedures: 

Part 1. Identification of Solids, Liquids, and Gases

Set out three boxes (or mark areas on the floor) labeled respectively SOLIDS, LIQUIDS, GASES, and gather a variety of items as listed above. Tell students that you want to teach them a new game of “Solids, Liquids, and Gases.”


Start children out by placing some items in the appropriate box and making the statement yourself: Water is liquid. (Be sure you draw children’s attention to the liquid in the container and not the container. You may do so by pouring a small amount of the respective liquid into a bowl.) A pencil is a solid. Air is gas. (Blow or fan your hand in the “gases” box.) Let children continue, taking turns choosing an item and placing it in its respective box. Let children be the ones to catch mistakes and discuss why the item should go in one box versus another. Items can be taken out of the boxes and “recycled” at any point. Also, you may simply name familiar items and let students state which they are.

NOTE: I recommend leaving living things out of this activity at the beginning because they are complex combinations of liquids, solids, and also gases. This makes their simple classification as one state of matter or another impossible. They are addressed at a later point in this lesson. 

As students pursue this activity, they will pick up distinctive features of solids, liquids, and gases on an intuitive level. As this occurs, bring students to consider the basic attributes of each by asking: Can we come up with a simple statement that will describe all solids? Let kids offer suggestions as they will and jot them all on a board, but then assist them as necessary in condensing their suggestions into a simple statement that is still descriptive of all solids. Do the same for liquids and gases.  

Deliberations should reach conclusions to the effect:

• Solids are any and all things that have a distinct size and shape. They will sit by themselves without the need of a container. There are many sorts of solids. Some are hard and brittle, some soft and flexible, some are relatively light, others are heavy and so on. But, if it keeps its shape when it is left alone, it can be classified as a solid.

 • Liquids: Anything that flows or runs is a liquid. Some liquids such as syrup may flow slowly, but if it flows at all, we call it a liquid. Hence, liquids need to be kept in containers. Any liquid will take the shape of the container, but does not expand to fill the container, e.g., one can readily see that a container is half full of liquid.  

• Gases: Anything that behaves like air is a gas. (Air is actually a mixture of gases, but let’s not confuse things with that at the beginning level.) A gas may be held in a container and expands to fill the container regardless of the size of the container. That is, one cannot visually see that a container is half full of a gas.

NOTE: Many children will have trouble appreciating that air is a real substance, because it seems to be just “nothingness.” Draw their attention to how we breathe it in and out, how we can blow bubbles with it, and how we blow up balloons and tires with it. We also feel it as wind blowing on our faces. (Lesson A-3 will go further in demonstrating the nature of air.)

There are many sorts of gases and most will mix with the air such that they cannot be seen, but they can be smelled. All smells are something in a gas form. The smell of perfume, for example, is particles of the liquid perfume becoming a gas, moving through the air, and being detected by your nose. Add a SAFETY lesson here by pointing out that some gases are poisonous to breathe. If they detect a strange unpleasant odor, they should get away from it into fresh air and tell adults about it. In this regard, make special mention of the gas burned in gas stoves and furnaces.

Some students may note that things like sugar and breakfast cereal also flow as you pour them and you need to keep them in containers. Should they be called liquid or solid? Point out that solids in small particles (powder or granules), will behave somewhat like a liquid. But here is the difference: Spilled sugar and such things can be swept into a pile that keeps its shape. If we push a liquid into a “pile,” it immediately reverses and spreads out again. Thus, granular materials still fit the definition of being solids.

In terms of assessment students should be able to demonstrate their mastery by correctly identifying any given item as solid, liquid, or gas and say why they classify it as such.  Be careful in your questioning, however. If you point to a bottle of fluid, be specific that you are referring to the fluid and not the bottle, which is, after all, a solid. The same goes for balloons and other containers filled with gas. Indeed, there are many things that may be combinations of gas, liquids, and solids. Consider pillows with lots of air within the solid stuffing material and a sponge full of water as examples. Living things are especially important in this regard. Living organisms, ourselves included, are complex combinations. Children may enjoy the challenge of identifying gas, liquid, and solid parts of the body. 

Part 2. Changes Between Solid, Liquid, and Gas—Dependence on Temperature

Have kids classify an ice cube. They will most likely identify it as a solid. But then watch it melt. What does it become? Water, a liquid! Conversely, liquid water becomes a solid, ice, when placed in the freezer. Kids are likely to ask: So, is water really a solid or a liquid? Emphasize that solid, liquid, and gas refer to the present state of the material. Pause and ask: What are we really observing here? 

Let kids ponder for a time, but guide them to conclude that things change state—solid to liquid or liquid to solid—depending on temperature. The cause-effect relationship should not escape notice. Raising temperature causes a change from solid to liquid (melting); lowering temperature causes a change from liquid to solid (freezing). Water is the most commonly experienced case, but have students consider, and demonstrate, if you desire: butter, wax, bacon grease. (PRECAUTION: Do not heat wax in a pan directly on the stove. If it gets too hot, it is subject to exploding.) Go on to have students consider metals, glass, and rock. They too melt and become liquid, but at very much higher temperatures. Videos of metal casting and lava flows may be worthwhile here (Google: casting metal video/flowing lava). 

Just as importantly have students note that materials that melt as temperature raises generally return to their solid state as they cool. But not everything melts at higher temperature. Have kids reflect on paper, wood, and other biological materials. They simply burn and disintegrate, and they stay disintegrated as temperature is lowered. They do not return to their original state. (The chemistry of what happens here is for later.)

As kids are comfortable with the idea that many materials change between liquid and solid states with temperature, introduce them to the idea that things change from liquid to gas as well. Again, water is the prime example. Ask: What happens to the water as a pot boils to dryness? Beginning students will usually draw a blank. Inform them that the water is going off into the air as a gas (water vapor), which may initially be seen as steam from the pot. Likewise, other materials, e.g. metals, vaporize but only at extremely high temperatures. 

In short, many substances in addition to water have solid, liquid, and gas phases, the transitions caused by increasing or decreasing temperature. Recall, again, that any smell is the substance in a gaseous state. However, each substance has a particular temperature at which the changes occur. For metals (other than mercury) the transitions occur at very high temperatures. For gases in the air, transitions occur at very low temperatures. Students may be familiar with liquid air, other liquid gases, and dry ice. This is pursued further in Lesson A-8, after we have introduced the particulate nature of matter, Lesson A-4. For now, it is most prudent to just introduce the concept. 

Part 3. States of Matter and Their Common Attributes

Instruct students that all solids, liquids, and gases, together, are referred to as MATTER.  Thus, we refer to solids, liquids, and gases as different STATES OF MATTER. Said another way, there are three fundamental states of matter: solid, liquid, and gas. Further, the term “matter” applies to all living or biological, natural Earth, and human-made materials. In summary everything in, of, and on the world is made of matter. We have investigated and defined three fundamental states of matter: solids, liquids, and gases. (Many texts introduce a fourth state of matter—plasma. Since students have no direct way of seeing, feeling or otherwise experiencing plasma, however, it is intentionally omitted from this lesson. Introducing plasma at the beginning level only tends to cause confusion.)

Ask and allow students to reflect on the questions: Is there any way we can define matter other than saying that it is all solids, liquids, and gases? That is, are there any attributes shared by all forms of matter? Without hints, kids are likely to draw a blank, so provide hints as necessary. 

What about taking up space? Allow students to reflect and cite ways in which they can demonstrate that any/all forms of matter take up space. What about having weight? (At the beginning level it is not worth getting into a discussion distinguishing weight and mass. We recommend staying with what is familiar—weight.) Solids and liquids have obvious weight, but many students will question gases, especially air. An activity that demonstrates that air has weight is in Lesson A-3. Thus, lead students to conclude that two attributes possessed by all states of matter are: It occupies space, and it has weight. 

Finally add: Does matter, in one form or another, include everything we experience in the natural world? If any students answer, “Yes,” ask: “What about light?” “What about heat?” “Can you weigh them?” “Can you show that they take up a certain amount of space?” If anyone answers, “Yes,” ask them to describe or demonstrate how. As they find themselves stumped, invite them to change their answer. But heat and light are just as real as matter. Instruct children that these, along with some other things, are forms of energy, which are equally important aspects of the universe (and we will address the concept of energy in Lesson C-1.) Along this line, some kids will ask, “What is a flame?” with the expectation of a solid, liquid, or gas answer. Let kids reflect that what they witness as a flame is heat and light. These are forms of energy and energy is a concept quite different from matter (Lesson C-1). 

Don’t expect kids to comprehend the breadth of the term “matter” right away. The idea of matter as the basic construction material of the universe and the distinction between matter and energy are concepts that will come gradually as they are dealt with repeatedly in future lessons. 

Questions/Discussion/Activities to Review, Reinforce, Expand, and Assess Learning: 

Students should make one or more paper-fold books illustrating/describing:
the three states of matter
the change in state that may occur with temperature

Discuss how solids, liquids, and gases provide a fundamental pattern for categorizing everything around us.

What is matter? What are two attributes of all matter? Does everything we encounter have weight and occupy space? What about heat and light? What are they?

Discuss how some things change from solid to liquid and back. What causes the change? (More advanced students may investigate and contrast the melting and freezing points of various minerals, metals, liquids, and gases. Google: melting boiling points of ____) The point to bring out here is that freezing or melting invariably involve cooling or heating. If there is neither heating nor cooling, the matter remains stable (unchanged).

What sorts of materials will not melt or freeze. 

Set up an activity center where children can repeat the activity of placing various things in their proper category: solid, liquid, or gas. Have them give the reason/evidence for each choice. 

In small groups, pose and discuss questions such as:
What is the one word that embraces all solids, liquids, and gases? 
State an attribute of a solid, liquid, or gas and ask: Which is it? For example: It takes the shape of a container but does not fill it. (liquid) It has weight. (all forms of matter)
Relate solids, liquids, gases to the whole Earth (land, oceans, atmosphere).
Relate solids, liquids, gases to their own bodies. Cite parts or areas of your body that are solid, liquid, and gas. 
If matter did not exist, what would the world be like?
Could an actively living organism be made entirely from one state of matter? If so, what would be like? How would it work?
Name things we experience in everyday life that are not a form of matter. What are they?

To Parents and Others Providing Support:

In the kitchen, bathroom, at meal time, or as you go through a grocery store or drugstore, have kids point out solids, liquids, and gases. (Any smell is a gas.) Have them give the reason/evidence for their answer. 

Have children identify components of their bodies that are solid, liquid, gas. (Five-year-olds invariably get a kick out of noting that their urine is a liquid.)

Call your children’s attention to things melting/freezing, evaporating/condensing (changing from liquid to gas or gas to liquid). Discuss the cause for such changes.

On outings or with a globe and or various pictures in hand, discuss how the whole world can be described in terms of solids, liquids, and gases (land, water, atmosphere).

Play “20 Questions,” starting with: Is it gas, liquid, or solid, or a combination?


Re: Framework’s Principles and NGSS 

Recognizing that everything in the universe is made of matter in one form or another and distinguishing matter and energy is a primary stepping-stone into all areas of science and technology and permeates everyday experience. This qualifies this lesson as  presenting a Core Idea. 

Implementing the lesson will engage students in Practices: a, d, e, f, and g, and draw them to think in terms of Crosscutting Concepts: a, b, e, and h. It will specifically provide students with information needed to achieve NGSS: 2-PS1-4 and 2-PS1-1. It will also provide a primary stepping-stone toward achieving NGSS: 5-ESS2-1.

Books for Correlated Reading:

Curry, Don L.  What Is Matter? (Rookie Read-About Science).  Children’s Press, 2005.

Garrett, Ginger.  Solids, Liquids, and Gases (Rookie Read-About Science).  Children’s Press, 2005.

Mason, Adrienne.  Change It!:  Solids, Liquids, Gases and You (Primary Physical Science).  Kids Can Press, 2006.

Zoehfeld, Kathleen Weidner.  What is the World Made Of? All About Solids, Liquids, and Gases. HarperTrophy, 1998.  

Walker, Sally M.  Matter (Early Bird). Lerner,